# optimal-mp-belief-distortions
Replication Package for "Optimal Monetary Policy Response to Belief Distortions: Model-Free Evidence" - Jonathan J. Adams and Symeon Taipliadis (2025)

Run "START_HERE.R"

Important information:
- We run all baseline results with 10,000 bootstrap iterations
  and all robustness results with 1,000 iterations.
- In this replication package we set 100 bootstrap iterations so the user can get the results fast. 
  The user can change the number of iterations at "PARAMETER_SETTINGS.R": (line 24) slct_bootruns <- 100
- In the Baseline VAR model the data covers the period: May 1978 - May 2023. (\*)	
- In the SVAR model, the data covers the period: January 1978 - May 2024. (\*\*)
- Notes (\*,\*\*):  	1. The data in Baseline VAR starts 4 months later than the SVAR because we have used 4 lags in the (OLS) Rational Expectations regression.
			2. The data in Baseline VAR ends 12 months before the SVAR because the estimation of Belief Distortions requires identification of ex-post Rational Expectations (which requires ex-post 1-year-ahead CPI).
- Monetary Policy shocks cover the period: February 1988 - December 2023.
  
**R-SCRIPTS:**
- START_HERE.R:			Start with/Run this R script (it calls all R scripts in order).
- LOAD_LIBRARIES.R:		Load all necessary libraries.
- PARAMETER_SETTINGS.R:		This R script contains all parameters (incl. number of lags, number of horizons, significance level, etc); it adjusts the parameters in the loop for robustness tests.
- ORTHOG_MPS.R:			Orthogonalize monetary policy instruments to macro variables.

- RATIONAL_EXPECTATIONS.R:	Runs the OLS rational expectations regression to estimate belief distortion shocks for the reduced-form methodology.
- RUN_FUNCTIONS.R:		This R script contains all functions used in the VAR_MODEL.R.
- VAR_MODEL.R:			This R script contains all the methodology followed to (a) run the VAR model, (b) produce impulse response functions (IRF), (c) run counterfactuals, and (d) run bootstrap iterations.

- BD_PLOTS.R:			Code to produce plots of IRF to Belief Distortion shocks (reduced-form methodology).
- BD_PLOTS_STRUCTURAL.R:	Code to produce plots of IRF to Belief Distortion shocks (structural methodology).
- MP_PLOTS.R:			Code to produce plots of IRF to Monetary Policy shocks (reduced-form methodology).
- MP_PLOTS_STRUCTURAL.R:	Code to produce plots of IRF to Monetary Policy shocks (structural methodology).
- COUNT_PLOTS.R: 		Code to produce plots of IRF to Counterfactual policies (reduced-form methodology).
- COUNT_PLOTS_STRUCTURAL.R: 	Code to produce plots of IRF to Counterfactual policies (structural methodology).

- TABLE_1.R:			This R script prints the results of Table 1 in latex form.
- TABLE_2.R:			This R script prints the results of Table 2 in latex form.

**PLOTS:**
- The replication will save all plots at folder PLOTS. 

**DATA:**
- baseline_data.RData: contains all macroeconomic data and monetary policy instrument data from Swanson (2023); we use this data to run our baseline results.
- aruoba_data.RData: contains the monetary policy instrument data from Aruoba and Drechsel (2024); we use this data on a robustness test.

**ENVIRONMENT:**

- y_data: 	A data.table with all macroeconomic variables entering the VAR model.
- z_data: 	A data.table with all monetary policy instruments.
- shock_series: Same as z_data but we drop monetary policy series after February 2020 (We follow Swanson (2023) to establish a reference on the impact of monetary policy shocks to macro variables).
- data_set: 	A merged data.table of y_data and z_data.

- ts_var:	Data in time-series format (including lagged variables).
- formula_reg:	Regression formulas for OLS/VAR regressions.
- y_date:	A (data.table) column of all time periods of macro data.
- z_date:	A (data.table) column of all time periods of monetary policy instrument data.

- B_mat: 	A list of matrices with the Bj coefficients from the VAR model 
		example: B_mat[[2]] corresponds to lag 2 (see equations (1) and (2) of the paper).
- C_mat:	A matrix with intercepts of the VAR model.
- w_mat:	A matrix with the reduced-form residuals of the VAR model.
- y_hat_mat:	A matrix with the fitted values of the VAR model.
- Sigma_mat:	A variance-covariance matrix of the reduced-form residuals of the VAR model.

- phi_function:	A list of IRF matrices
		example: phi_function[[100]] corresponds to IRF 100 periods ahead of time t.
- A_mat:	The impact matrix. In the "reduced-form" methodology, A_mat is an NxN identity matrix.
- omega_mat:	Impact matrix of monetary policy shocks on reduced-form residuals 
		(see equation (10) in the Appendix).
- irf_mat:	A table with impulse responses of belief distortion shocks 
		(scaled to increase belief distortions by 1p.p. on impact).
- irf_boot:	A list of all irf_mat generated by the bootstrap iterations.

- irf_mat_mp:	A list of tables with impulse responses of monetary policy shocks
		(all scaled to increase 2Y treasuries by 1p.p. on impact)
- irf_mp_boot:	A list of all irf_mat_mp generated by the bootstrap iterations.

- phi_r:	A vector of unemployment and inflation impulse responses to a belief distortion shock (See Appendix).
- PHI_R_BOOT:	A list of all phi_r generated by the bootstrap iterations.

- phi_m:	A matrix of unemployment and inflation impulse responses to monetary policy shocks (See Appendix).
- PHI_M_BOOT:	A list of all phi_m generated by the bootstrap iterations.

- psi_coef_mat:	A matrix of optimal policy response (psi) coefficients (see 2.3 Calculating Optimal Policy).
- psi_boot:	A list of all psi_coef_mat generated by the bootstrap iterations.
- r_sq_mat:	A matrix of R-squared estimates from optimal policy regressions.

- SAVE_RESULTS:	A list where we save all impulse responses and optimal policy responses.
- SAVE_PLOTS:	A list where we save all figures.
